## Decentralised internet networks

Over the last few days I have been trying to build decentralised networks using various tools and techniques. Opposed to many others, It is the complexity of these technologies that fuelled my curiosity. The experiments gave me a deeper understanding of Blockchains, Peer2Peer sharing and webservers, but also caused headaches and confusion.

For my first experiment, I decided to build a webserver using a Raspberry Pi, SSD drive and my Zyxel modem. I managed to get my first webpage online within a relatively short amount of time and was amazed by how easy it actually is to do something like this. Why would I trust a webhosting company if I can do it myself? But then I stumbled upon some problems and questions; How should I protect my server against invaders? How do I backup my server? How do I guarantee a speedy connection for people on the other side of the world? Is it ecologically friendly to run your own server? Looking for answers I continued my research.

On my journey I regalary came across the term “WEB 3.0”. This would be a leap forward towards open, trust-less and permission-less networks. Although WEB 3.0 promises us decentralisation, there are many signs of centralised powers emerging in this developing space. One obvious example could be Elon Musk who is able to control the crypto market by posting memes on social media. On a more technical level there is the problem of platform capitalism where tech startups found a way to benefit from the complexity of decentralised web technologies. By offering simplicity through automation they gain an important powerful position in the market. I found a great example of this during my second experiment.

For my second experiment I build a website on the InterPlanetary File System. IPFS is a popular new system for storing websites, applications and other data. The thing that makes IPFS “special” is that it uses Peer2Peer technology to create a decentralised network. With this network it is possible to download from many different locations that aren’t managed by one organisation. It is based on the idea of possession and participation, where the people poses files and also participate in sharing them with others. However Peer2Peer is not a revolutionary new technology. It has been used by the Freenet's of the 2000’s and popular (illegal) file sharing services such as Napster and Bittorrent. 

Still, I wanted to try out IPFS because most of the articles that I read told me that it was the solution to combat the monopolism of companies like Amazon, Facebook and Google that is happening on WEB 2.0. 

The nice thing about IPFS is that they have a nice app interface for your desktop and phone. This makes things way less complicated to the point where no real coding skills are required to host a simple webpage. It took me only 10 minutes to host this blogpost on IPFS using the app.It can be accessed [here](https://ipfs.io/ipfs/QmZ9xWqAEXDjRpRiigUF1rqCgQdXYUCPG4615JW9CZy5vg?filename=index.htmlIn)

theory there is no real need for a dedicated server because my computer and phone are almost always connected to the internet. If other people with IPFS connect to my node, they automatically help me to distribute my website through their node aswell. However in reality this is not reliable. There has to be always one node online to make sure that the website doesn’t disappear on the IPFS network, but more nodes are better. The easiest way to do this is by using a pinning service which hosts multiple nodes for you. This is the part where the decentralised network is disrupted by capitalism. Because it takes effort to host your own node, developers often choose for these platform services. This is sad, because by doing this the platforms get a power similar to the big hosting services used for WEB 2.0. After this experience I believe that IPFS has potential, but is still in the first stage of becoming a usable and approachable technology.  



