## The Cloud is everywhere, but where?

The Cloud is everywhere. It has become increasingly intertwined with political, social and economic activities to the point where one could say that it has become a vital tool for taking part in our current society. As a result, the people that live in remote places without internet connection have a serious disadvantage over the people that are connected. Online has become the new normal.
As contemporary digital technologies are continuously being developed and our demands for data increase, our dependancy on the Cloud will continue to grow. Who knows, in 10 years we might all be wearing Virtual Reality glasses and inhabit a Metaverse that has replaced all regular forms of interaction. If this happens, we will be more dependant on a connection with the internet than ever before.

The term “Cloud” leads many to believe that its infrastructure is fluffy and somewhere up in the air. However, in reality it is a complex network consisting of computers and cables. The Cloud is hidden behind dirt, concrete, steel and biometric security systems. The owners of this invisible infrastructure are the people that store your documents, photo’s, cat video’s and other valuable data.

According to idc.com(1), the total market value of public Cloud Computing services is estimated to be 312 Billon Dolar. The insanely high number shows the scale of this and the capitalist drive behind its infrastructure. You might not be surprised that there are three major Silicon Vally companies who are currently dominating the Cloud market. The foundation of their business model relies on the “ownership” of data. Whoever has the most data has the biggest advantage over competitors. Together, Amazon AWS, Microsoft Azure and Google Cloud are responsible for half of the market shares. They are colonising digital space by building datacenters and submarine cable systems resulting into an internet network that is becoming increasingly centralised.

A centralised network will mean that a rather small amount of companies control the flow and storage of data. Crucial is the fact that they will also manage the implementation and development of network protocols. Ofcourse they will rather support those protocols that align with their business model.

The Cloud is everywhere. It might seem like an open and free space floating in the air, but hidden behind the cloudiness is a system of power relations that define our future. The scale and complexity of these systems might be scary, but this should not stop us from having discussions and critique our current digital infrastructure. One important thing to realise is that the Cloud depends on a two way relationship of sharing data. If we understand this, we can to use it in our advantage. This leads to the question: What is the relationship we have with the Cloud and how can we change it to become less dependant?


(1) https://www.idc.com/getdoc.jsp?containerId=prUS47685521




